Set size comparison and countable sets

Quote: The Infinite! No other question has ever moved so profoundly the spirit of man; no other idea has so fruitfully stimulated his intellect; yet no other concept stands in greater need of clarification -- David Hilbert

Outline
=======
* link to hotel infinity?
* how to compare finite sets without computation? by matching their elements
* problems with infinity: ``omega is less than omega''
* $2\times\omega = \omega$
* $\omega\times \omega = \omega$
* rationals are countable
* finite sets of rationals are countable
* uncountability: infinite sequences of 0,1

:------------------- FiniteFruitScene ----------------------------------
. Let's start with a problem for an elementary school.
. We have a few apples and a few pears, and we'd like to know
. which fruit we have more of. We were taught to do it in this way. We
. count the number of apples: 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, we count the number of
. pears: 1, 2, 3, 4, and since 5 is bigger than 4,
. there are more apples than pears.
.
. However, to move forward, let's forget about our knowledge gained in
. elementary school. What if we cannot count? How to determine which
. fruit we have more of? Well, there is another method, let's just
. pair up the apples with the pears. After we build such pairs, there
. is one apple left, so there are more apples than pears.

. That is not all of that. If we reorder the apples and the pears and
. try another matching, we get one apple left again. Let's try it one
. more time, ... again one apple left. Isn't that amazing?
.
. Well, it isn't, because we can count. We know that
. 5 apples minus 4 pears equals one extra apple.  % agrh, not sure how to say this in English well.
. There is nothing surprising about it at all.
. At least, until we meet infinity...

:----------------- InfiniteFruitScene -----------------------------------
. Imagine an infinite number of apples, every apple next to one
. natural number, and an infinite number of pears, again aligned to
. natural numbers.
.
. So there should be the same amount of them, right? Indeed, there is
. a natural matching between the fruits. However, we can choose
. another matching. We join the pear number zero with the apple number
. one, the pear number one with the apple number two and so
. on. Sudennly, there is one apple left, so seems that there is more
. apples that pears.

. And by an analogous trick, we can make it so that it seems like
. there is more pears that apples. What to do with that?
. A reasonable solution is the following definition.

. :{"Definition"}
. Consider two sets, $A$ and $B$.
. :{Boxes around apples and pears}
. If there is any pairing between $A$ and $B$ such that every element
. of $A$ and every element of $B$ is used exactly once, we say that
. these two sets have the same size.
. We denote the size of a set the same way that we
. write absolute value, and in the context of infinite sets, we
. rather talk about cardinality of a set than of its size.
. So we can read that as:
. "The cardinality of A equals the cardinality of B"
.
. Only if it is impossible to pair up these sets together,
. :{Finite number of pears, matching attempts}
. and no matter how we try, we leave out some elements of the set $A$,
. we say that the size of $A$ is bigger
. than the size of $B$.

:---------------------- NaturalsSubsets --------------------------

. This definition leads us to several surprising observations. Take
. the set of all natural numbers, and think about the set containing
. all even numbers, which is a subset of the natural numbers. Intuitively,
. there are less even numbers than both even and odd numbers combined.
. But there's an easy way to pair up the
. two sets such that no numbers are left over.
. :{|natural numbers|=|even natural numbers|}
. We can just match every number with twice that number: zero with
. zero, one with two, two with four, and so on. So, somewhat
. unintuitively, there's the 
. same amount of even numbers as there are natural numbers.
.
. In the same way, you can prove that many subsets of the integers have
. the same number if items as the integers themselves. For example, we can
. look at square numbers by matching one with one, two with four, three with
. nine, and so on. Or if we take just prime numbers, we can
. match then zero with two, one with three, two with five, and so on. If
. we take any infinite subset of natural numbers, however sparse, the
. size will still be the same.

:------------------------- NotationScene -----------------------------
. Let's introduce
. :{upbrace: finite sizes}
. some notation now. Sizes of finite sets are determined by natural
. numbers, zero, one, two and so on. In general, sizes are measured by
. so called cardinal numbers, or simply cardinals.
. Now, we have introduced an infinite cardinal number, the size of the
. set of natural numbers.
. it is called Aleph 0. The inventor of set theory, George Cantor
. established aleph, the first letter of Hebrew alphabet for the notation.
. Perhaps he considered both latin and greek alphabets too
. mainstream...
.
. We already showed that Aleph 0 is the least infinite
. size because every infinite part of it is still of the same
. size. That's why there is the zero at the subscript.
. All
. :{downbrace: countable sizes}
. these sizes are called "countable" meaning that natural numbers are
. enough for counting its elements even though we may need all natural
. numbers. During the rest of this chapter we will mainly investigate
. the properties of the size aleph 0 and countability.
.
:-------------------- InftyPlusInfty -----------------------------------
. We will show the notation on the example with even numbers. We already
. know that the set of even numbers can be matched with natural numbers,
. that means that the number of even numbers is aleph 0. Similarly, the
. set of odd numbers has the size aleph 0. So there are two sets of size
. aleph 0 which altogether gives again a set of size aleph 0, the set of
. all naturals.
.
. But for size comparison, the particular elements does not really
. matter. Just because we know that there are some sets of size aleph 0
. which altogether have again the size aleph 0, we can generalize this
. fact to whatsoever two sets with size aleph 0. They can be again our
. sets of apples and pears. Each of them has the size aleph 0 but
. altogether they still have the size aleph 0. So aleph 0 plus aleph 0
. is still the same size aleph 0. Alternatively speaking, the union of
. two countable sets is still countable. There is a meaningful
. example.
.
:--------------------- IntegersScene --------------------------------
. The number of non-positive integers, zero, minus one, minus
. two and so on, is aleph 0. They are just natural numbers reflected by
. the point zero. And there are aleph 0 of natural numbers. So the
. number of all integers is still Aleph 0.
.
. Q:"Hey, what happened to the merged zero?"
. Technically, the size could be less than aleph zero because two zeros
. were merged to one
. A:"The size is still countable infinite."
. but there is just one infinite countable cardinal number, the
. Aleph 0. So the size is still the same in our case.
.
:--------------------- InfiniteTable -----------------------------
. All right, the set of all natural numbers, can be
. divided into two sets of the same size, odd
. numbers and even numbers. We can go on and partition even numbers to
. numbers divisible by four and the others. All these three sets are
. infinite countable, thus of size aleph 0, so aleph 0 times three is
. still aleph 0. Let's continue and partition numbers divisible by 4 to
. those which are divisible by 8 and those which are not. Then partition
. the numbers divisible by 8 to those which are divisible by sixteen and
. the others. And so on.
.
. We end up with an infinite table of natural numbers. Every number
. occurs here exactly once with the exception of missing zero which has
. disappered somewhere in infinity. Nevertheless, the size of every row
. is aleph 0, there are aleph 0 rows. But all elements altogether are
. just natural numbers without zero, that is there are aleph 0 of
. them. That shows that aleph 0 times aleph 0 is still aleph zero. More
. generaly, the union of countable sets is still countable.
.
. In this case, we can even directly describe the matching.
. You may noticed that there are powers of two at the first column, two
. to the power of zero, one, two, in general two to the power of 'r' where
. 'r' denotes the index of the row.
. And similarly, there are all odd numbers in the first row, so we can
. desribe them as 2c plus 1 where c denotes the index of the column
. begining with zero.
. What's more, any item of the table is just the product of the
. appropriate elements in the first row and the first column.
.
. So if we write the positions instead of the numbers
. and rearrange them back into the original line,
. we see a matching between pairs and all natural numbers except zero
. given by the formula 2^r * (2c+1).
.
. To tune it into perfectness, we tweak the formula
. by shifting by one to the left so we cover even the missing zero. Not
. just there is a matching between pairs of natural numbers and natural
. numbers. It can be even realized by a relatively simple formula.
.
:---------------------- RationalsScene -------------------------------
. Let's see this in mathematical practice again. We already know that
. the size of all integers is aleph 0. Similarly, the set of all
. integers divided by two is of the same size. The same holds for
. integers divided by three, integers divided by four and so on.
.
. What if we merge all of these sets? The line becomes pretty
. full. There are actually all rational numbers. Every number of a form
. an integer divided by a non-zero natural number were in some of our
. rows so it is in the resulting set. Therefore, the size of all
. rational numbers is aleph 0 as well. And again, technically, some
. points got merged but aleph zero is the only countable infinite
. cardinal number, so the size cannot be anything else.
.
. Q:"Are all sets countable?"
. Considering all this you could be under the impression that actually every set
. can be countable.
. A:"Of course not ;-)"
. But in that case, the notion of countability and aleph 0 would be
. quite useless, don't you think?
. In fact, there is a whole variety of
. uncountable cardinals and the aleph 0 is just the first of infinite
. cardinals, by no means the last one. A famous example of an
. uncountable set is the set of all real numbers. While the line seems
. to be filled by rational numbers, the vast majority of it is in fact
. still missing.
.
. But real numbers are a bit technical so for now let's see another
. famous example.
.
:-------------------- CantorDiagonal -----------------------------
. The number of all infinite sequences of zeros and ones
. is uncountable. Indeed, whenever we make an atempt of matching natural
. numbers with such sequences we can find a sequence we have missed by
. the following procedure. Look at the digits on the diagonal, that is
. the digit at the position zero of the sequence matched with zero, then
. the digit at the position one of the sequence matched with number one,
. and so on. Finally, we invert the sequence, that is replace the zeros
. with ones and vice versa. This sequence cannot be in in our list
. because the diagonal is blocking all possible rows. And it is not the
. only sequence missing, it would not be problem since aleph 0 plus one
. is still aleph zero. But if we add it, we can find another one by the
. same procedure. In fact, the vast majority of sequences is missing, an
. uncountable cardinal number of them.
.
. The procedure of finding missing sequence is called Cantor's diagonal
. argument and in the next chapter we will explore it in more detail and
. more generality. You can also expect the explanation of the technical
. details of real numbers together with another key set-theoretical tool
. making set size comparison cleaner, the Cantor-Bernstein theorem. See
. you then.
