Set size comparison and continuum
=================================

Quote: Some infinities are bigger than other infinities. -- John Green

Outline
=======
* $\P(X) = {}$labeling X by 0,1
* $|\R| = \P(\omega)$?, injections to both sides
* Cantor-Bernstein (graph proof),
* excercise: $\R^2 = \R$
* unanswered questions: Are every two sets comparable? Are reals the least uncountable set?
* Cantor's theorem in general,  $|\P(X)| > |X|$.
* $\P(\P(\P(\omega))) > \P(\P(\omega)) > \P(\omega) > \omega$

:-------------------------RecapChapter2------------------------------
. In the last video, we have shown several sets of the size aleph 0 --
. natural numbers, prime numbers, integers, rational numbers, and one
. bigger set, the set of all infinite sequences of zeros and ones. The
. current chapter is devoted primarily to this particular bigger size.
.
. First of all, an infinite sequence of zeros and ones is in a sense the
. same thing as a subset of omega, the set of all natural numbers.
. Indeed, we can interpret the sequence as a mask.
. Ones simply represents the naturals included in that subset and zeros
. represents the omited numbers.
. And vice versa, any set of natural numbers can be encoded into
. such a mask by writing ones to the positions of occuring numbers and
. zeros to the rest.
.
. More formally, this translation defines a matching
. between infinite binary sequences and subsets of omega. Any binary
. sequence is matched with a subset of omega and vice versa. So we
. have actually proved that the set of all subsets of omega has the same
. size as the set of all infinite sequences of zeros and ones. In fact,
. a procedural description of matching is quite common in set theory
. since is difficult to construct a matching of unimaginably large sets
. otherwise.
. 
. Moreover, the operation of taking all subsets of a set is pretty
. common procedure in set theory.
:-----------FinitePowerSetScene--------------
. Take a set X, for example the set of numbers 0,1,2, and
. consider all the subsets, that is the empty set, three subsets
. containing just one element, three subsets containing two elements and
. the set itself, and pack it to another set.
. The operation is denoted by a caligraphic P, meaning
. power-set.  Thus, the resulting set is denoted P of X.
. 
. The reason for such a name is inspired by the behavior in finite case.
. We started with a set of size three, and the resulting set have 8
. elements, that is 2 to the power of three. That is not a coincidence,
. we can decide whether to include the number zero, that are two cases,
. whether to include the number one, again two cases, and whether to
. include the number two.  So the total number of subsets is two times two
. times two, that is two to the power of three.
. It applies in general. If there is a finite set of n
. elements, we can decide for each of them whether to include it, or
. not, and the size of the powerset is then two to the power of n.
.
. In finite case, it is obvious that powerset creates bigger sets, two to
. the power of n is much larger than n, right? One is less than two,
. four is less than sixteen, ten is less than one thousand and twenty
. four.
. From the last video we
. know that that the power-set overcomes even the countability, the
. powerset of omega is larger than omega. Does that hold in general?
. Is the power-set of arbitrarily large set larger than the original
. set?
. 
. In fact, the Cantor's diagonal argument was general enough to cover
. all possible sets. But let's see it from the power-set perspective to
. make it more universal and to see different forms of the same idea.
.
:-----------CantorRevisited--------------
. Take the power-set of a set, say omega, and consider a matching of
. natural numbers with members of the power-set, that is subsets of
. omega. We want to find a missing subset in that matching.
. 
. Some numbers are matched with a set that contains it. For example the
. set matched with zero contains zero, ot the set matched with four
. contains four.  Other numbers are missing in their corresponding
. subset: One is missing in the set matched with one, two is missing in
. the set matched with two, and so on.
.
. Now, take the set of all missing elements, let's denote it say M as missing.
. This cannot be matched with any number like zero which is contained in
. the matched subset because such a number is missing in M. And on the
. other hand, it cannot be matched even with any number missing in the
. matched subset, like two, because such a number is contained by M.
. Of course, the subset M is a subset of omega, it is hiding somewhere
. in the powerset of omega, it just managed to avoid the matching.
.
. The idea is actually the same as saying that the
. diagonal is blocking any position of the set but we don't need to be
. able to draw it for this kind of reasoning.
. We have divided elements to "contained"
. and "missing" and taken the set of all missing ones.
. So the power-set is a general
. tool for making infinite sets bigger. And it serves for the finite
. case as well, so we could say that the Cantor's diagonal argument
. provides a proof that two to the power of n is bigger than n. But it
. is kinda overkill, don't you think?
. 
. In the next chapter we will explore the possibility of making large
. sets with the powerset but for now, the size of P of omega will
. suffice.
.
:-----------------------SubsetToReal---------------------------------
. Another famous example of an uncountable set is the set of all real
. numbers. In the rest of the chapter we will see how the size of all
. reals, usually called continuum and denoted by a fraktur c,
. and the size of the powerset of omega are connected.
.
. The reason why reals are uncountable is actually simple.
. We already know that a subset can be transformed into an infinite
. sequence of zeros and ones.
. And such a thing can be simply transformed into a real number by
. writing zero point before it.
. If we managed to enumerate all real numbers by naturals, we would
. cover even those special real numbers matched with subsets of
. omega. That cannot happen since we know that the powerset of omega is
. uncountable, so the real line have to be uncountable too.
.
. It seems that the real line is actually larger than the powerset of
. omega since we have matched all subsets of omega with a negligible
. amount of real numbers. But to be sure, we have to check all possible
. matchings between reals and the powerset of omega to see whether there
. is one covering all real numbers.
.
. One example of such a matching is the following.
. Take a real number, say minus one and half..
.
:-------------------------RealToSubset-----------------------------
.
. Any such number can be described by a decimal representation. It is
. a finite or infinite sequence of characters from a small list --
. there are ten digits, decimal mark and a possible minus sign.
. These symbols can be encoded into numbers from zero to eleven.
. If we packed these numbers into a set now, we would lose the ordering
. of these characters. But we can fix that with a little trick, to
. every encoded character we add a number of hundreds signalizing its
. position. So the first encoded character remains the same, the
. second one is changed to one hundred and one, the third is changed
. to two hundreds and eleven and the last one transforms into three
. hundreds and five.
.
. And the same procedure works even for real numbers with infinite
. decimal expansion, just the resulting set is infinite too.
. 
. Now, all real numbers are covered by this green matching but some subsets are
. missing this time. For example, forty two is never in a subset constructed
. in this way.  So it seems that reals form a smaller set than P of
. omega until we check all possible matchings to check whether they are
. not equal. It is tempting to say that there is just one possible
. outcome, the sizes of the two sets have to be equal since a set cannot
. be smaller and bigger at the same time, right?
.
. But having the same size is just our shortcut for an existence of a
. perfect matching between these two sets which cover both of them.
. We are not guarranteed that whatever definition
. of bigger and smaller sets we make up will work as we expect. We could
. see a paradoxical behaviour even with countable sets. Now, it is true
. that a set cannot be greater and smaller at the same time but it
. desires a justification.
.
:----------------------CantorBernsteinScene------------------------
. We have a green matching which covers all reals but not all subsets of omega.
. And then another red matching covering all subsets of omega
. but not all reals. We would like to somehow
. combine these two matchings so that every real number will be
. connected with just one subset of omega.
. 
. The trouble-makers are primarily such elements that are not covered by
. one of the matching, for example the real number five which is not of
. the form zero point and then some zeros and ones. So we need the other
. matching assigning it the one-element set containing 5. That means
. that we cannot use the appropriate red connection between the
. singleton containing 5 and the real number zero point zero zero zero
. zero zero zero one. So we have to take the green connection from that
. real number again. By this procedure, we take an infinite journey from
. a point not covered by the red matching by the steps which are
. guaranteed to exist. That is green step from reals to subsets and red
. step from subsets to reals. On this path we are forced to use green
. connections.
.
. The infinite path is isolated from any other matching edges because
. every point in the path can be connected by at most one green edge
. and one red edge and both of them are already in the path. The only
. exception is the first point which was chosen so that there is no red
. line matching it.
.
. Similarly, if we start with a point which not covered by the green
. matching, we find a path on which we are forced to take the green
. connections.
. For every uncovered red or green point, there is a corresponding
. infinite sequence of forced matching lines.
. Technically, there is an infinite amount of such sequences. But
. there is no difference in the reasoning and showing all of them
. would make the picture too messy, so we have just five of them here.
.
. But even after isolation of these sequences, the matching is not
. completely analyzed. Just that every remaining point is connected by
. both red and green matching, so we can choose the matching we like,
. for example the green one.
.
. There can be in a cycle path. Or some both-sided infinite
. paths. Nevertheless, we can just use the green matching for these
. types.
.
. So the proof goes as follows. Divide the whole picture into three
. types of components. One-sided infinite paths starting at the top,
. one-sided infinite paths starting at the bottom, and the rest, that is
. both-sided sequences and cycles. In the first case take green edges, in
. the second take red edges and in the third one take say again green
. edges. By merging these components together, we have extracted a
. single matching between our two sets which covers both sides.
.
. In general, this is the proof of so called Cantor-Bernstein theorem
. which exactly states that a set cannot be smaller than another and
. bigger than it at the same time. But there still can be some unclear
. stuff around the set comparison.
. Namely we should not be sure yet whether
. every two sets are comparable, that is whether we can allways find a
. matching of one of them to a part of the other. And another natural
. question is to ask whether the cardinal number continuum, which
. measures the real line or the power set of omega, is the smallest
. uncountable cardinal. The answer to the first question is "Yes" but we
. need the set theory built for the proof so you can expect it in the
. end of the series.
. 
. The second question is tricky, it is called the continuum hypothesis
. and it is open, that is no one knows the truth. But in this case, it
. is open in another sense than other famous open problems like Riemann
. hypothesis, or P-NP problem. Usual open problems are open because
. nobody solved them yet. But the continuum hypothesis is proven to be
. open forever. However the proof of unsolvability of the continuum
. hypothesis is too advanced for this series at all.
.
:04----------------------FirstLimitStep------------------------
. In the next chapter, we will look at the idea of constructing a large
. set by transfinite recursion. See you then.
