Formal recursion
================

* this will be pretty technical but
  * it is good to see how the theory of infinity and the foundation of mathematics are connected
  * it can help to avoid a feeling that the next chapter is just a hand-waving
* example: a set is not well ordered, why does it contain an infinite decreasing sequence?
* recall the intuitive proof
* but: "You cannot use infinitely many steps in a proof."
  * "What? I am doing it all the time."
  * "It can be avoided by clever operations with infinite structures."
  * example with the Cantor's theorem
* recursion as an induction
  * why did it help?
  * induction as a proof by contradiction
* one more problem: limit step require determinacy
  * how to use the axiom of choice here
* recapitulation:
  * recursion is a kind of induction but we need determinacy for limit steps
  * we can assure the determinacy by running the axiom of choice before launching the recursion
  * induction is a proof by contradiction, that is why we formally need well-order
* exercise: every infinite set is at least countable


This chapter will be pretty technical. 
And to be honest, it is not necessary to know the entrails of recursion for using it.
:{examples animations}
That is why we introduced transfinite recursion rather by some examples instead of analyzing it on the formal level.
Despite this, the formal understanding of recursion is quite an essential part of set theory.
:{Connection between "Theory of Infinity" and Foundation of mathematics}
It forms the bridge between the two roles of the set theory.
:{chapter list}
And we will need some non-trivial general usage of transfinite recursion in the following chapters.
So, even though you could understand them without knowing the inside of the recursion,
this chapter can help you reduce the feeling that the proofs there
are just based on hand-waving.

At this chapter, we are going to look very closely into the proof of
the following observation we met in chapter~{well-ordering}. Whenever
an ordered set contains a non-empty ending without first element,
:{brace: "No first element"}
then there is an infinite decreasing sequence in it.

And the proof is actually pretty straightforward. Start with any
element of the ending. It is not the first one, so we can go below.
And again, and again, and so on.
So we constructed an infinite decreasing sequence in the ending.

But infinite proofs are not allowed. Even though we are investigating
an infinite world, we need to use finite number of steps for proving it.
:{"You cannot use infinite number in steps in a proof?"}
:{"What? I am doing it all the time!"}
:{"It can be avoided by clever operations with infinite structures."}
You may be surprised by this, but take the proof of Cantor's theorem
as an example. It is the theorem from chapter \ref{size-comparison}
saying that whenever you assign natural numbers to infinite sequences
of zero's and one's, there have to be a sequence you have missed.

The proof can go as follows. Look at all elements at the diagonal,
that is one operation. Make a new sequence from them, that is the
second operation. And finally, invert it. In three operations, we
constructed a sequence which is not assigned to any natural number.

All right, that was not so difficult. But what can we do with the
gradual construction of a decreasing sequence? How can we cover the
fact that it is an infinite process? We need to be more cunning.

:{"Hint: Replace recursion by induction."}
Instead of recursion, we use induction. That is, we prove that if
there is a sequence with zero steps, there is also a sequence with one
step. If there is a sequence with one step, there is a sequence
consisted of two steps. And so on. In general, every sequence of
length $n$ can be extended to a sequence of length $n+1$. So at the
end, we know that there is a sequence of any natural length.
:{"Does not sound it helped very much."}
It still looks like an infinite proof. First step is proving from zero
to one, the second step is proving it from one to two and so on.
:{Induction is just a proof by contradiction.}
But we can rephrase any such inductive proof as a proof by
contradiction. Lets ask every natural number whether there is
decreasing sequence of its length.
:{"Dear numbers, is there a decreasing sequence of your length?"}
This is a single operation, namely
the axiom of selection. Some numbers give positive answers.
:{Green ticks}
Zero give
the positive answer, one give the positive answer, 7 gives a positive
answer. But is it possible that any number answered negatively? Let's
disprove such an absurd case. If any number answered negatively, we
can find the minimal one.
:{minimal}
That is because natural numbers are well ordered. In fact, this is the
reason why the usual definition of transfinite recursion is defined in the
way that any non-empty subset have to contain a minimal element. So
we can convenietly use it now on the set of all numbers which gave
a negative answer, and get the minimal one.

So, say that eleven is the least number which answered negatively. In
particular, ten gave a positive answer, so there is an infinite
decreasing sequence of length 10. But when we have such a decreasing
sequence, we can simply extend it to a sequence of length 11. So 11
lied. But numbers are perfect objects in the mathematical world, they
are not allowed to lie. So the only possible outcome is that our
initial assumption that some numbers answered negatively was wrong.

So all of them have to answer positively, that is, there a decreasing
sequence of any finite length.

:{Are we done?}
:{No, we are at the half of the proof.}
Now it is tempting to say that we are done. But we are not, the use of
induction took its price. We are missing a kind of a limit step.

From the induction, we have some decreasing sequences of every finite
length. We could pick one sequence of every length by the axiom of
choice but they don't have to be compatible. So we cannot simply
merge them together.

There is a fundamental problem: just a decreasing
of every length does not ensure an infinite decreasing sequence.
As an example, take the ordinal omega plus one. There is a decreasing
sequence of length one, as well as a decreasing sequence of length 5
or any other finite length. So our incautious use of induction
discarded so much information that we are not able to finish the proof.

But the induction is not the only thing to blame here. The trouble we
get to was caused by the incautious induction and the indeterminacy
here. The sequences can be incompatible just because we have various
possibilities where to go at every step. If there were strict rules,
say we begin at the number four and at every step we have to jump to
the half of the current number, the sequences are forced to be
compatible. Every sequence starts at the number 4, then continue to
the number 2, then to 1, to one half, and so on. In that case, we can
merge all the finite sequences and get the infinite one.

And this idea leads to the solution, we just have to figure out how to
make the proces determinable even if we work with a general setup.The
trick is to use the axiom of choice, not after the induction, not
during it but before. For every point, there are many places where to
continue. There are a lot of possibilities how to continue from this
point, as well as there are lot of possibilities where to continue
from this point, and so on. But we can consider all the points
and all the possible steps for each of them. By the axiom of choice,
we pick just one step for every possible point and collect them into
the rule list.

Now we launch the recursion with these rules: At every point
the only step we are allowed to take is the one in the rule list.
These rules are given by the axiom of choice, not by a written formula
but it does not matter. The sequence is determined now, so all the
finite sequences have to be compatible, so we can merge them to one
infinite sequence.

TODO: recap, note about the transfinite recursion
